docs: document user-secret observer lifecycle and secret-changed semantics (#2522)
canonical/operator: docs/howto/manage-secrets.md

Reviewer: Please could you add a meta description for this page if possible?

Author: Ah, I had been quite good at remembering to do that when I created/edited, but indeed forgot for this one. Will do!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your charm creates new revisions, it **must** also add a handler for the `secret-remove` event, and call `remove_revision` in it. If not, old revisions will continually build up in the secret backend. See {ref}`howto-remove-a-secret`
```

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    description: Manage Juju secrets in a charm as the secret owner, as an observer of charm secrets, and as an observer of user secrets shared via configuration.
---

(manage-secrets)=
# How to manage secrets
See first:
- {external+juju:ref}`Juju | Secret <secret>`
- {external+juju:ref}`Juju | Manage secrets <manage-secrets>`
- {external+charmcraft:ref}`Charmcraft | Manage secrets <manage-secrets>`

```{note}
Added in Juju 3.0.2.
```

This document shows how to use secrets in a charm -- both when the charm is the secret owner as well as when it is merely an observer.

## Secret owner charm

```{note}
By its nature, the content in this section only applies to *charm* secrets.

> ```

Reviewer: I think this can be body text. Plus a tweak:

```suggestion
This section only applies when the charm is the secret owner.
```

## Secret observer charm

> This section covers the **charm-secret observer** path, where the secret ID is shared via relation data. For **user secrets** (secrets created by a Juju user and shared via a `secret`-typed config option), see [](#manage-secrets-user-secret-observer) below.
>

> > A secret owner charm is also an observer of the secret, so this applies to it too.

Reviewer: I think it would be good to simplify the formatting and rearrange the paragraphs. Something like this:

```suggestion
This section covers the **charm-secret observer** path, where the secret ID is shared in relation data. A secret owner charm is also an observer of the secret, so this section applies to secret owner charms too.

For **user secrets**, which are created by a Juju user and shared through configuration options of type `secret`, see [](#manage-secrets-user-secret-observer).
```

> See more: [](ops.Secret.get_content)

(manage-secrets-user-secret-observer)=
## User-secret observer charm

> See also: {ref}`manage-configuration`

A **user secret** is a secret created by a Juju user (via `juju add-secret`) and shared with a charm through a configuration option of type `secret`. Unlike a charm secret, which a charm creates and owns, the user-secret lifecycle is controlled entirely by the user.

### Prerequisites

Before the charm can read a user secret, the following must be done by the Juju user:

1. Create the secret: `juju add-secret my-secret key=value`
2. Grant it to the application: `juju grant-secret my-secret <app-name>`
3. Set the configuration option to the secret URI: `juju config <app-name> <secret-option>=<secret-uri>`

> 

Author: ````suggestion
```{important}
`juju grant-secret` does **not** fire a hook. The charm is not notified when access is granted; it only learns about the secret when the user sets the configuration option (which triggers `config-changed`) or when the user updates the secret content (which triggers `secret-changed`). Make sure you grant access **before** changing the configuration, or the charm will fail to access it on config-changed, and will not know to retry.
```

The charm must also declare a configuration option of `type: secret` in its `charmcraft.yaml`:

````

> See more: [](ops.Secret.get_content)

(manage-secrets-user-secret-observer)=
## User-secret observer charm

> See also: {ref}`manage-configuration`

> A **user secret** is a secret created by a Juju user (via `juju add-secret`) and shared with a charm through a configuration option of type `secret`. Unlike a charm secret, which a charm creates and owns, the user-secret lifecycle is controlled entirely by the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A **user secret** is a secret created by a Juju user (with `juju add-secret`) and shared with a charm through a configuration option of type `secret`. Unlike a charm secret, which a charm creates and owns, the user-secret lifecycle is controlled entirely by the user.
```

> A **user secret** is a secret created by a Juju user (via `juju add-secret`) and shared with a charm through a configuration option of type `secret`. Unlike a charm secret — which a charm creates and owns — the user-secret lifecycle is controlled entirely by the user.

Author: ```suggestion
A **user secret** is a secret created by a Juju user (via `juju add-secret`) and shared with a charm through a configuration option of type `secret`. Unlike a charm secret, which a charm creates and owns, the user-secret lifecycle is controlled entirely by the user.
```

### Prerequisites

Before the charm can read a user secret, the following must be done by the Juju user:

1. Create the secret: `juju add-secret my-secret key=value`
2. Grant it to the application: `juju grant-secret my-secret <app-name>`

> 3. Set the configuration option to the secret URI: `juju config <app-name> <secret-option>=<secret-uri>`

Reviewer: Where does the secret URI come from?

Author: The add-secret output. Should the (1) say something like "Create the secret and record the secret URI in the output: `juju`...? Or (3) say something like:

```suggestion
3. Set the configuration option to the secret URI that `secret-add` output: `juju config <app-name> <secret-option>=<secret-uri>`
```

Or a different approach?

Reviewer: I prefer adjusting (3), but with "returned" instead of "output"

> The charm must also declare a configuration option of `type: secret` in its `charmcraft.yaml`:

Author: ````suggestion
```{important}
`juju grant-secret` does **not** fire a hook. The charm is not notified when access is granted; it only learns about the secret when the user sets the configuration option (which triggers `config-changed`) or when the user updates the secret content (which triggers `secret-changed`). Make sure you grant access **before** changing the configuration, or the charm will fail to access it on config-changed, and will not know to retry.
```

The charm must also declare a configuration option of `type: secret` in its `charmcraft.yaml`:
````

> `juju grant-secret` does **not** fire a hook. The charm is not notified when access is granted; it only learns about the secret when the user sets the configuration option (which triggers `config-changed`) or when the user updates the secret content (which triggers `secret-changed`). Make sure you grant access **before** changing the configuration, or the charm will fail to access it on config-changed, and will not know to retry.

Reviewer: I think "trigger" and "event" would be better than "fire" and "hook". How about a further simplification:

```suggestion
`juju grant-secret` does **not** trigger an event to notify the charm. The charm only learns about the secret when the user sets the configuration option (which triggers `config-changed`) or when the user updates the secret content (which triggers `secret-changed`). Make sure you grant access **before** changing the configuration, or the charm will fail to access it on config-changed, and will not know to retry.
```

```

The charm must also declare a configuration option of `type: secret` in its `charmcraft.yaml`:

```yaml
config:
  options:
    my-secret-option:
      type: secret
      description: URI of the user-provided secret.

> ```

Reviewer: I recommending moving this to the beginning of the Prerequisites section. It will help to give context to step 3 above. It also comes first logically - the charmer does their part before the user does their part.

> > See more: {external+charmcraft:ref}`Charmcraft | Manage secrets <manage-secrets>`

Reviewer: The linked section isn't so helpful because it's almost entirely links to other places (including here). How about linking to https://documentation.ubuntu.com/charmcraft/latest/reference/files/charmcraft-yaml-file/#charmcraft-yaml-key-config instead?

```python
class MyCharm(ops.CharmBase):
    def __init__(self, *args, **kwargs):
        ...  # other setup
        self.framework.observe(self.on.config_changed, self._on_config_changed)
        self.framework.observe(self.on.secret_changed, self._on_secret_changed)

    def _on_config_changed(self, event: ops.ConfigChangedEvent):

>         secret_uri = self.config.get('my-secret-option')

Author: This could use `load_config` but it seems like it would unnecessarily complicate the example.

> Resolve the secret URI from the configuration and fetch the content via the model:

Reviewer: I'd drop this in favour of some code comments (see my other suggestions)

```suggestion
```

        self.framework.observe(self.on.secret_changed, self._on_secret_changed)

    def _on_config_changed(self, event: ops.ConfigChangedEvent):
        secret_uri = self.config.get('my-secret-option')
        if not secret_uri:

>             return
>         secret = self.model.get_secret(id=secret_uri, label='user-provided-secret')
>         content = secret.get_content()
>         self._configure_with_secret(content)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        # Read the secret.
        secret = self.model.get_secret(id=secret_uri, label='user-provided-secret')
        content = secret.get_content()
        # Do something with the secret content.
        self._configure_with_secret(content)
```

    def _on_secret_changed(self, event: ops.SecretChangedEvent):

>         if event.secret.label == 'user-provided-secret':
>             content = event.secret.get_content(refresh=True)
>             self._configure_with_secret(content)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            # Read the secret.
            content = event.secret.get_content(refresh=True)
            # Do something with the secret content.
            self._configure_with_secret(content)
```

The **only event** a user-secret observer receives is `secret-changed`, fired when the user updates the secret content (for example, via `juju update-secret`). Unlike charm secrets, user secrets have no rotate, expire, or remove lifecycle.

```{important}
`juju grant-secret` does **not** fire a hook. The charm is not notified when access is granted; it only learns about the secret when the user sets the configuration option (which triggers `config-changed`) or when the user updates the secret content (which triggers `secret-changed`).

> ```

Author: ```suggestion
The **only event** a user-secret observer receives is `secret-changed`, fired when the user updates the secret content (for example, via `juju update-secret`). Unlike charm secrets, user secrets have no rotate, expire, or remove lifecycle. The Juju user is responsible for managing the secret lifecycle.
```

> The **only event** a user-secret observer receives is `secret-changed`, fired when the user updates the secret content (for example, via `juju update-secret`). Unlike charm secrets, user secrets have no rotate, expire, or remove lifecycle. The Juju user is responsible for managing the secret lifecycle.

Reviewer: A couple of minor suggestions. I'm wondering about "for example" - is `secret-changed` triggered by other commands such as `revoke-secret`? I might still drop "for example" for easier reading, since the text already scopes things to a user updating a secret.

```suggestion
The only event a user-secret observer receives is `secret-changed`, triggered when the user updates the secret content (for example, with `juju update-secret`). Unlike charm secrets, user secrets have no rotate, expire, or remove lifecycle. The Juju user is responsible for managing the secret lifecycle.
```

        self._configure_db_credentials(content['username'], content['password'])
```

See more: [](ops.Secret.get_content)

(manage-secrets-user-secret-observer)=
## User-secret observer charm

See also: {ref}`manage-configuration`

A **user secret** is a secret created by a Juju user (with `juju add-secret`) and shared with a charm through a configuration option of type `secret`. Unlike a charm secret, which a charm creates and owns, the user-secret lifecycle is controlled entirely by the user.

### Prerequisites

The charm must declare a configuration option of `type: secret` in its `charmcraft.yaml`:

```yaml
config:
  options:
    my-secret-option:
      type: secret
      description: URI of the user-provided secret.
```

See more: {external+charmcraft:ref}`Charmcraft | config <charmcraft-yaml-key-config>`

Once that's in place, the Juju user must:

1. Create the secret: `juju add-secret my-secret key=value`
2. Grant it to the application: `juju grant-secret my-secret <app-name>`

> 3. Set the configuration option to the secret URI: `juju config <app-name> <secret-option>=<secret-uri>`

Author: ```suggestion
3. Set the configuration option to the secret URI that `secret-add` returned: `juju config <app-name> <secret-option>=<secret-uri>`
```

```{important}
`juju grant-secret` does **not** trigger an event to notify the charm. The charm only learns about the secret when the user sets the configuration option (which triggers `config-changed`) or when the user updates the secret content (which triggers `secret-changed`). Make sure you grant access **before** changing the configuration, or the charm will fail to access it on config-changed, and will not know to retry.
```

### Read a user secret

```python
class MyCharm(ops.CharmBase):
    def __init__(self, *args, **kwargs):
        ...  # other setup
        self.framework.observe(self.on.config_changed, self._on_config_changed)
        self.framework.observe(self.on.secret_changed, self._on_secret_changed)

    def _on_config_changed(self, event: ops.ConfigChangedEvent):
        secret_uri = self.config.get('my-secret-option')
        if not secret_uri:
            return
        # Read the secret.
        secret = self.model.get_secret(id=secret_uri, label='user-provided-secret')
        content = secret.get_content()
        # Do something with the secret content.

>         self._configure_with_secret(content)

Reviewer 2: Is `_configure_with_secret` a placeholder or is it defined elsewhere in our docs ?

I am okay with it being a placeholder.

Author: Placeholder/example.

    def _on_secret_changed(self, event: ops.SecretChangedEvent):
        if event.secret.label == 'user-provided-secret':
            # Read the secret.
            content = event.secret.get_content(refresh=True)
            # Do something with the secret content.
            self._configure_with_secret(content)
```

> ### User-secret event contract

Reviewer 2: I am curious about "contract" here. Does it mean the behavior below will "be stable"/"not be changed" ?

Author: Yes, but it could be put more simply, will change.

```suggestion
### User-secret events
```
